# ECI Distribution

This repository contains a golang library and CLI for VM images, manage
disk images, kernel, initrd and other bootable artifacts in OCI registries. It can
build, push and pull those images.

It is inspired directly by [ORAS](https://github.com/deislabs/oras) and leverages it, but is opinionated to the ECI use case. As such, it uses elements of [OCI Artifacts](http://github.com/opencontainers/artifacts).

It can store the images in multiple formats:

* `artifacts` (default): leverage full artifacts mime types, with each layer a different artifact
* `legacy`: standard mime-types and configs, with each layer a different artifact; if the standard type is `.tar`, then the single file is tarred; if the standard type is `tar+gzip`, then the single file is tarred and gzipped.

Note that the `legacy` format actually looks identical to putting the artifacts in a filesystem in an OCI container
image. We simply leverage annotations to indicate where each artifact is.

Because the `legacy` format replicates a standard OCI container image, you can create it using standard docker
tools as well. An example is shown below.

In all cases, annotations are used as well.

## Usage

### Pushing an ECI

To push an ECI to a registry, you need the following items in a directory:

* a root disk image in any supported format: raw, vhd, vmdk, iso
* a Linux kernel (optional)
* a Linux initrd (optional)
* additional disks (optional)
* a config file, whose contents provide the desired OCI manifest config

Note: If you do not provide a config file, a default will be created, using the following
information. It can be overridden via options; run with `--help` to see the options.

* OS: current platform OS
* Arch: current platform arch
* Author: `lfedge/edge-containers`

You can push the image as follows:

```sh
eci push --root path/to/root.img:raw --kernel path/to/kernel --initrd path/to/initrd --disk path/to/disk1:iso --disk path/to/disk2:vmdk ... --config path/to/config lfedge/eci-nginx:ubuntu-1804-11715
```

The above uses the default `artifacts` format, which assumes that the registry fully supports Artifacts
and will use specialized mime types.

If you wish to use one of the other formats, or do not have a choice as you are using a registry that does
not yet support artifacts, select an alternate format with the `--format` flag.

For the `legacy` format:

```sh
eci push --format legacy --root path/to/root.img:raw --kernel path/to/kernel --initrd path/to/initrd --disk path/to/disk1:iso --disk path/to/disk2:vmdk ... --config path/to/config lfedge/eci-nginx:ubuntu-1804-11715
```

The `eci` command will take care of setting the correct mime types and annotations on all of the objects.

Note that disks, both root and additional, **must** have the file name, following by a `:` and the disk type,
so that consumers know how to interpret them, e.g. to send a disk file whose name is `mydisk` and
is of type qcow2:

```sh
--disk mydisk:qcow2
```

#### Using Standard Docker

Standard docker tools do not support the `artifacts` format. However, you can build and push
using the `legacy` format with standard docker tools. However, docker does not support
adding annotations to the manifest, except using experimental tools.

To support standard docker tools, we support reading the annotations from the image labels,
which are stored in the config that is generated by `docker build`.

To use standard docker tools, you need to do two things:

1. Place the artifacts, such as disks or kernel, in your container image filesystem
1. Add appropriate labels to the container image

The following Dockerfile is equivalent to the above:

```Dockerfile
FROM scratch
COPY path/to/root.img /root.img
COPY path/to/kernel /kernel
COPY path/to/initrd /initrd
COPY path/to/disk1 /disk1.iso
COPY path/to/disk2 /disk2.vmdk
```

Then run:

```console
docker build -t lfedge/eci-nginx:ubuntu-1804-11715 --label "org.lfedge.eci.artifact.root"="/root.img" --label "org.lfedge.eci.artifact.kernel"="/kernel" --label "org.lfedge.eci.artifact.initrd"="/initrd" --label "org.lfedge.eci.artifact.disk-1"="/disk1.iso" --label "org.lfedge.eci.artifact.disk-2"="/disk2.vmdk" .
```

You can include the labels in the Dockerfile, which makes sense, by adding `LABEL` commands:

```Dockerfile
FROM scratch
COPY path/to/root.img /root.img
COPY path/to/kernel /kernel
COPY path/to/initrd /initrd
COPY path/to/disk1 /disk1.iso
COPY path/to/disk2 /disk2.vmdk

LABEL "org.lfedge.eci.artifact.root"="/root.img"
LABEL "org.lfedge.eci.artifact.kernel"="/kernel"
LABEL "org.lfedge.eci.artifact.initrd"="/initrd"
LABEL "org.lfedge.eci.artifact.disk-1"="/disk1.iso"
LABEL "org.lfedge.eci.artifact.disk-2"="/disk2.vmdk"
```

And then run:

```console
docker build -t lfedge/eci-nginx:ubuntu-1804-11715 .
```

Note: if you use the `legacy` format, your config file needs to be in a specific format
for docker to recognize it. This utility builds it for you, and it is recommended you accept
the default. However, if you provide `--config`, you can override it. Use at your own risk.

### Pulling an ECI

To pull an ECI, you simply need a registry where the components will be downloaded:

```sh
eci pull lf-edge/eci-nginx:ubuntu-1804-11715
```

The above will default to placing artifacts in the current directory. To place them in a different directory:

```sh
eci pull --dir foo/bar/ lf-edge/eci-nginx:ubuntu-1804-11715
```

The `eci` command knows how to read the manifest and annotations and determine how to extract the data.

Note that _whatever_ format it is in, it can be pulled "as is" by docker, containerd, go-containerregistry,
img or any other tool that knows how to pull OCI images.

## Media Types and Annotations

The specific standard media types are at [docs/mediatypes.md](./docs/mediatypes.md).

In addition to the types, `eci` _always_ will add annotations to the layer and config in the manifest describing its purpose.

The specific standard annotations are at [docs/annotations.md](./docs/annotations.md).

## File Names

ECI is highly opinionated about the file names. No matter what names you pass to it, it will give the files particular names. These are listed in [docs/filenames.md](docs/filenames.md).

## Sample Manifest

A sample manifest for an actual pushed image is below. This is a manifest on docker hub, so the media types
are the legacy types, while the annotations provide the purpose.

```json
{
  "schemaVersion": 2,
  "config": {
    "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.config.v1+json",
    "digest": "sha256:ffb3941df4fe37f22165b124d66e966d93b3dbf2765b736818b57a4516aed94e",
    "size": 14,
    "annotations": {
      "org.lfedge.eci.mediaType": "application/vnd.lfedge.eci.config.v1+json",
      "org.opencontainers.image.title": "config.json"
    }
  },
  "layers": [
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "digest": "sha256:edeaaff3f1774ad2888673770c6d64097e391bc362d7d6fb34982ddf0efd18cb",
      "size": 4,
      "annotations": {
        "org.lfedge.eci.mediaType": "application/vnd.lfedge.eci.kernel.layer.v1+kernel",
        "org.lfedge.eci.role": "kernel",
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "kernel"
      }
    },
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "digest": "sha256:da1464fd7ceaf38ff56043bc1774af4fb5cb83ef5358981d78de0b8be5a6fbcb",
      "size": 4,
      "annotations": {
        "org.lfedge.eci.mediaType": "application/vnd.lfedge.eci.initrd.layer.v1+cpio",
        "org.lfedge.eci.role": "initrd",
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "initrd"
      }
    },
    {
      "mediaType": "application/vnd.oci.image.layer.v1.tar",
      "digest": "sha256:deb055d836e44a1dcf0317b0cacac2dbdd36301f82abf787f7849d3f5b916750",
      "size": 5,
      "annotations": {
        "org.lfedge.eci.mediaType": "application/vnd.lfedge.disk.layer.v1+raw",
        "org.lfedge.eci.role": "disk-root",
        "org.opencontainers.image.title": "disk-root-root.raw"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

## Differentiation Specification

How does the pull client - and anything else that might want to pull the artifacts - know what it has in hand?
It could be one of:

* a normal OCI container image
* a legacy format image from this library/utility, which is identical to a normal OCI container image with VM artifacts inside
* an artifacts format image from this library/utility

The parsing process is as follows:

1. Retrieve the manifest.
1. If the layers have the special `mediaType`, it is an ECI in artifacts format; use them as is.
1. If the layers have the special annotations, it is an ECI in legacy format; extract using `tar`/`gzip`
1. It is a regular OCI image.

## Go Library

The go library is `github.com/lf-edge/edge-containers/pkg/registry`. Docs are available at [godoc.org/github.com/lf-edge/edge-containers/pkg/registry](https://godoc.org/github.com/lf-edge/edge-containers/pkg/registry).

## Build

The `eci` tool can be built via `make build`, which will deposit the build artifact in `dist/bin/eci-<os>-<arch>`, e.g. `dist/bin/eci-darwin-amd64` or `dist/bin/eci-linux-arm64`. To build it for alternate OSes or architectures, run:

```sh
make build OS=<target> ARCH=<target>
```

e.g.

```sh
make build OS=linux ARCH=amd64
make build OS=linux ARCH=amd64
```
